# Form Radio

<PageHeader>

For cross browser consistency, `BFormRadioGroup` and `BFormRadio` uses Bootstrap's custom radio input to replace the browser default radio input. It is built on top of semantic and accessible markup, so it is a solid replacement for the default radio input.

</PageHeader>

## Individual radios

<<< DEMO ./demo/RadioIndividual.vue

## Grouped radios

The individual radio inputs in `BFormRadioGroup` can be specified via the `options` prop, or
via manual placement of the `BFormRadio` sub-component. When using manually placed
`BFormRadio` components within a `BFormRadioGroup`, they will inherit most props and the
v-model from the `BFormRadioGroup`.

<<< DEMO ./demo/RadioGroup.vue

Feel free to mix and match `options` prop and `BFormRadio` in `BFormRadioGroup`. Manually
placed `BFormRadio` inputs will appear _below_ any radio inputs generated by the `options` prop.
To have them appear _above_ the inputs generated by `options`, place them in the named slot `first`.

<<< DEMO ./demo/RadioGroupMixed.vue

## Options property

<!--@include: ./_options.md{5,}-->

<<< DEMO ./demo/RadioCustomFields.vue

## Radio value and v-model

`BFormRadio` components do not have a value by default. You must explicitly supply a value via
the `value` prop on `BFormRadio`. This value will be sent to the `v-model` when the radio is
checked.

The `v-model` of both `BFormRadio` and `BFormRadioGroup` binds to the default `modelValue` prop. To
pre-check a radio, you must set the `v-model` value to the one of the radio's value (i.e. must match
the value of specified on one of the radio's `value` prop). Each radio in a radio group _must_ have a unique value.

Radios support values of many types, such as a `string`, `boolean`, `number`, or a plain `object`.

## Inline or stacked radios

By default, `BFormRadioGroup` generates inline radio inputs, while `BFormRadio` generates
stacked radios. Set the prop `stacked` on `BFormRadioGroup` to make the radios appear one over
the other, or when using radios not in a group, set the `inline` prop on `BFormRadio` to true to
render them inline.

<<< DEMO ./demo/RadioInline.vue

## Control sizing

Use the `size` prop to control the size of the radio. The default size is medium. Supported size
values are `sm` (small) and `lg` (large).

<<< DEMO ./demo/RadioSizing.vue#template{vue-html}

Sizes can be set on individual `BFormRadio` components, or inherited from the `size` setting of
`BFormRadioGroup`.

::: info NOTE
Bootstrap v5.x does not natively support sizes for the custom radio control. However,
bootstrap-vue-next includes custom SCSS/CSS that adds support for sizing the custom radios.
:::

## Button style radios

Render radios with the look of buttons by setting the prop `buttons` to `true` on
`BFormRadioGroup`. Set the button variant by setting the `button-variant` prop to one of the
standard Bootstrap button variants (see [`BButton`](/docs/components/button) for supported
variants). The default `button-variant` is `secondary`.

The `buttons` prop has precedence over `plain`, and `button-variant` has no effect if `buttons` is
not set.

Button style radios will have the class `.active` automatically applied to their label when they are
in the checked state.

<<< DEMO ./demo/RadioButtons.vue

## Reverse

Use the `reverse` prop to put your radio buttons on the opposite side of the label.

<<< DEMO ./demo/RadioReverse.vue#template{vue-html}

## Without Labels

In order to omit labels as described in the
[bootstrap documentation](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/5.3/forms/checks-radios/#without-labels)
just leave the default slot empty. Remember to still provide some form of accessible name for
assistive technologies (for instance, using aria-label).

<<< DEMO ./demo/RadioNoLabels.vue#template{vue-html}

## Non-custom style radio inputs (plain)

You can have `BFormRadio` and `BFormRadioGroup` render a browser native-styled radio input
by setting the `plain` prop.

<<< DEMO ./demo/RadioPlain.vue

::: info NOTE
`plain` will have no effect if `buttons`/`button` is set.
:::

## Required constraint

When using individual `BFormRadio` components (not in a `BFormRadioGroup`), and you want
the radio(s) to be `required` in your form, you **must** provide a `name` on each `BFormRadio`
in order for the required constraint to work. All `BFormRadio` components tied to the same
`v-model` **must** have the same `name`.

The `name` is required in order for Assistive Technologies (such as screen readers, and keyboard
only users) to know which radios belong to the same form variable (the name also automatically
enables native browser keyboard navigation), hence `required` will only work if `name` is set.
`BFormRadioGroup` will automatically generate a unique input name if one is not provided on the
group.

## Autofocus

When the `autofocus` prop is set on `BFormRadio`, the input will be auto-focused when it is
inserted (i.e. **mounted**) into the document or re-activated when inside a Vue `KeepAlive`
component. Note that this prop **does not** set the `autofocus` attribute on the input, nor can it
tell when the input becomes visible.

## Contextual states

Bootstrap includes validation styles for `valid` and `invalid` states on most form controls.

Generally speaking, you'll want to use a particular state for specific types of feedback:

- `false` (denotes invalid state) is great for when there is a blocking or required field. A user
  must fill in this field properly to submit the form
- `true` (denotes valid state) is ideal for situations when you have per-field validation throughout
  a form and want to encourage a user through the rest of the fields
- `null` Displays no validation state (neither valid nor invalid)

To apply one of the contextual state icons on `BFormRadio`, set the `state` prop to `false` (for
invalid), `true` (for valid), or `null` (no validation state).

::: info NOTE
Contextual state is not supported for radios rendered in buttons mode.
:::

### Contextual state with feedback example

<<< DEMO ./demo/RadioFeedback.vue

### Conveying contextual validation state to assistive technologies and colorblind users

Using these contextual states to denote the state of a form control only provides a visual,
color-based indication, which will not be conveyed to users of assistive technologies - such as
screen readers - or to colorblind users.

Ensure that an alternative indication of state is also provided. For instance, you could include a
hint about state in the form control's `<label>` text itself, or by providing an additional help
text block (i.e. `BFormInvalidFeedback`). Specifically for assistive technologies, invalid form
controls can also be assigned an `aria-invalid="true"` attribute (see below).

### ARIA `aria-invalid` attribute

When `BFormRadioGroup` has an invalid contextual state (i.e. state = `false`) you may also want
to set the `BFormRadioGroup` prop `aria-invalid` to `true`.

Supported `aria-invalid` values are:

- `false` (default) No errors detected
- `true` The value has failed validation

`aria-invalid` is automatically set to `true` if the `state` prop is `false`.

<ComponentReference :data="data" />

<script setup lang="ts">
import {data} from '../../data/components/formRadio.data'
</script>
